The view from the street is a pristine Parkside home, but that belies a surprisingly open, contemporary and family-friendly design inside. The architect owner has seamlessly melded innovative, artistic features with classic elements in this 1931 California Mediterranean house. A stairwell wall angles askew; Douglas fir framing is neatly exposed, and the kitchen sink wraps around like a highway s-turn, allowing 270 degrees of access. While the style reflects artistry, the design is functional.

Upon entering, a sunny breakfast room opens to the left, and a comfortably sized living room invites you to the right. The barrel-shaped ceiling and original hex-patterned oak floors, as if inspired by a cubist painting, are the first notable design elements. Another is the wood-burning fireplace, providing toasty ambiance on a cool evening.

Pass through the living room French doors into the perfectly square dining room, lit with a square skylight centered overhead. The classic proportions and deep ceiling cove state calm symmetry, but then step into the customized kitchen and experience a delightful mélange of bold color, shapes, and materials. Yellow paint, gray concrete counters, cork floor, and original wood cabinetry stripped to a natural finish – the kitchen calls to mind the South of France. However, the vintage, refurbished Wedgewood range and oven evokes 1950s Americana. Your guests will find the contrast delightful, and you will find the open plan highly functional.

Beyond the kitchen, two bedrooms flow easily from one to the next, each brightly lit with bold bay windows. Both bedrooms are served by a stunning slate and mirror bathroom with a transparent counter and an open shower. From the first bedroom on the main level, a sculptural oak ladder leads to a large sunny loft with a finished wood ceiling.

Down the open stairway from the main level is a family/media room and just beyond is the master bedroom, both drawing garden light through a glass wall. Once more, form fuses with function with sliding privacy walls, stained concrete floors, and Japanese Tansu-like cabinetry integrated into the staircase. The colorful Moroccan inspired sky-lit master bath reveals an oversized tub to soak in after a long day.

Finally, make your way out the Dutch door from the master bedroom to the backyard, with its BBQ, patio and array of flora: California wildflowers, wisteria, and Japanese plum and maple trees to name a few.